Charlie, okay.
You have a good one then.
What happens, you see, is in the world according to Garp, I just began the story at the beginning.
And I've regretted that many times since because it seems to me many people were misled in that the story begins with Garp's mother and how she gets herself pregnant and how she has Garp.
And for easily the first 100 pages of that book, Jenny Fields is the main character.
And then she yields to her son.
And there's a kind of an emotional, psychological false start that the reader has to make, a kind of choice between characters.
Similarly, I could have made the same decision
with the Cider House Rules.
That is, I could have begun with Dr. Larch's childhood, which is the beginning of the story.
But I felt certain that Dr. Larch was really, although he was the main sort of spiritual force of the book, the main character was Homer Wells, the orphan.
And so I began with Homer Wells being born.
in his early years at the orphanage and the early attempts to adopt him before I flashed back to Larch's childhood.
And by the time I got to Owen Meany, I was really comfortable with going back and forth in time.
In other words, in order to go back and forth in time, in order to flash forward, to flash back,
You have to have a very clear idea of the actual chronology of the story in order to take liberties about where to begin it.
My choice in Son of the Circus was obvious.
To me, there were three places I could have begun.
I could have begun with Martin Mills arriving, which would have been chaos and confusion.
The reader would have been as confused as Martin.
It would have been funny, but funny in a very different way.
And that would have presented me with an enormous flashback, because to begin with Martin Mill's arrival would necessitate not only telling the story of how he got to be a twin after we've met him, so to speak, which I didn't think was as funny as knowing he's a twin when we see him arrive, right?
So that was a choice.
And the easy place to begin the story,
and not have to worry about flashbacks and flash-forwards and sort of juggling time, would have been to begin with Nancy and go, begin with Nancy.
But that would have been an imitation of what I think was Garp's problem as a novel, which is, if you begin with Nancy, you meet Dr. Darawalla as a minor character.
He comes into her life.
And you then have to make a shift, some hundred pages later, to realizing that he's the main character.
You see what I mean?
And so I felt that the best place to begin was where it would end.
He realizes at the end that he will always go back to India, that he will keep returning there, and he's no longer kidding himself that he's doing it for the dwarfs.
He's no longer kidding himself that, because his dwarf blood project is dead, he didn't get there.
And now he knows he's going back, and he can't.
sort of metaphorically or comically or with any credibility anymore, say, it's the dwarfs.
Well, it's interesting he keeps the apartment with his servants.
I mean, that's... Yes, yes.
That's a tip-off.
You know, it's a nice... To me, that gave the book...
a kind of bookend.
To have the first section called Blood from Dwarfs and the last section called Not the Dwarfs gave it a kind of symmetry.
But as important to me as that was the real point in time where the piece begins is the Doctor, it's in the first chapter that we discovered the body of Mr. Lal, and Mr. Lal is the penultimate
murder in the novel.
And I like that idea of encountering a victim that looks like a victim of something else, and then of someone else, but not at all like the 68th or 69th victim in a sort of sea of serial killings.
Did the vultures really move in that way in India?
Oh, yeah.
Geez.
I mean, they don't waste any time.
No, they don't waste any time.
I mean, were you consciously playing in an opening scene a Sherlock Holmes, Dr. Watson kind of a takeoff?
It is kind of funny.
It's supposed to be.
Well, you see, when you say, you see, that's, it's all kind of funny to me.
I mean, to me, it's very funny.
You're a real doctor here.
And the cop is a fake cop.
He's very good at it.
Yes.
And he's making deductions of the regular investigators.
He's very good.
Yes.
And I said, this is funny.
I mean, I wonder if he's actually, you know, giving us a sense here of maybe this is just something I'm picking up.
But I enjoyed that.
No, no.
It's, I think, well, I think, I hope the whole novel is funny.
But obviously, you know, the...
The idiot at Publishers Weekly wasn't laughing.
No.
Do you see yourself as a satirist at all?
I mean, there is exaggeration of this humor.
I don't know what the qualities are that makes sense.
I think in some cases, certainly you could say that the whole section about the movie guys in Bombay is a satire.
The whole chapter called The Vermin, the flashback about
Gordon and Vera and the whole crew.
But every time you've got a good thing about those things, you just give me one of those little titles, and I know instantly where we are.
Well, that's why I kept them there.
I mean, they were always a part of the manuscript, but they weren't always.
I interrupted.
You were going off of a sad time, so let's go back to that.
No, no, no.
I just mean that that's the portrait of the movie people.
is a satire.
The portrait of Martin Mills' childhood in California is a kind of a bookend to the early bookend.
In other words, we get an early view of how these people conduct their lives, Vera and Danny and Gordon Hathaway and the rest of them.
We get a view of how they conduct their lives in Bombay, and then very near the end of the novel, we see what a horrible childhood Martin Mills has had, which is also a part of the movie business.
Do you remember Gordon Hathaway and the old Steve Allen show?
Has that really came up with the name for that character?
No.
Remember the Louie Nye's, I'm Gordon Hathaway, I'm from Manhattan?
Remember Steve Allen used to do the man on the street?
I remember that.
Old, old 1950s, and the guy would come on, and he had Louie Nye, Don Hodge, and Louie Nye was, I'm Gordon Hathaway, and I'm from Manhattan.
No, to be perfectly honest with you, I don't remember that.
I don't remember that.
No, I don't remember that.
I was a big Steve Allen fan, too.
We group here.
You do?
I think that the weight of...
a defect, a mutation, an illness, an element that makes someone appear freakish to the outside world is often, if you present them properly, can often be a means of making them a most sympathetic character.
For example,
Dr. Larch is an ether addict, but his service to those orphans and to that orphanage at St.
Cloud's is full of such obvious love and care that his addiction grows
to become, rather than a criticism of him or a failure of him, an indication of how vulnerable he is.
Vinod's dwarfism, the hand controls in his car, the way he's shot by the elephant into the bleacher seats, is
His coping with that deformity, with that defect, is a large part of his heroism.
I'm setting up the moment when he comes to Martin Mills' rescue.
you know, whacking the transvestites away with his squash racket handles.
That image of him, you know, it needs a little background.
You need to know the crippled, sort of damaged, sort of injured life that has preceded it.
And...
Even a character who is pure evil, who is just the most menacing of villains, a character like Raoul or Mrs. Dogger, is himself or herself.
You know, someone who is severely afflicted.
They just are characters who, you know, who's...
difference is another road to creating sympathy.
Is exaggeration still as much part of your bag of tools as it was earlier novels?
I don't think so.
And yet, I think that some people reading this book, especially those people that we've mentioned who are not reading it,
as friends or as John Irving readers, will seize upon some of the freaks in it and sort of declare it to be another kind of freak show repetition.
The misunderstanding, of course, is that these people are largely seen through Dr. Darawalla's eyes.
And Dr. Dharawala himself is the least freakish, the most ordinary, in a good sense, the most normal of people that I've ever written about.
He's, you know, he is a... You know how he sees quotes?
Yes.
He is the most, he is absolutely the most normal.
And he looks upon these people not as freaks, but with affection.
And
I think to seize upon the freakishness of these characters or any characters of mine is also a... It's a misunderstanding of the pains that have been taken in a book like this to make every word of the atmosphere, the background of the story, authentic.
There is not an act attributed to the circus that I made up.
Whether it's the farting clown or the cricket playing elephants, they are all acts I have seen.
They exist.
There is nothing made up about the transsexual community.
It does exist.
They absolutely do.
And one of the things that I'm so pleased with as a coincidence is that, I don't know if you see much in the way of science news,
But the very defect that causes achondroplasia, the kind of dwarfism that Dr. Darawalla has been searching for, a genetic marker for, that very defect has been found just now.
The timing is wonderful for me because
It gives a kind of nobility to Dr. Dorawala having searched for this for so long, and in his amateur effort, he gives up.
You're looking for a tough stone.
I mean, first of all, I'm reading this.
I don't know if you watch the news, but did you see that rogue elephant killed that?
Oh, yeah.
Unbelievable, right?
Yeah.
And then meanwhile, the O.J.
Simpson thing is going on, all this DNA, and people are learning all about genetic markers.
And I hope they won.
I hope they won.
Yeah, I don't know what they really won.
In any case, it's not all that bizarre, is it?
I mean, all of these different things.
They're that elephant thing.
It's an elephant stalking.
It's unbelievable.
I know you've got some three.
I don't want to say about Logan.
And I don't mean to dwell on Garth either, but I do want to ask one question.
Did the overwhelming success of Garth, maybe two questions, in a sense, liberate you to do the kind of novel?
Yeah, I'm happy to be asked the question that way.
You see, you just presume that the success makes the next one harder or something.
This is a poor understanding of the time it takes to write anything.
The truth is that I don't think... I don't think I could have written a novel as ambitious as this one or as The Cider House Rules if I were living the same way I had always the right up to and including the writing of The World According to God, namely with teaching jobs and coaching jobs and other jobs.
I think...
at least in the five and a half years that this book took me, I think it's a 10 or a 12 year project if I have another job.
And it's probably for that reason, therefore, a book I would not ever have begun.
There are things you can do, things you can dream of doing as a writer
when the day is yours and when your job is being a writer.
And for the first four books, Garp included, I was a teacher, I was a coach who had to find time, usually not more than two hours a day, to write.
Ask a doctor to practice medicine for two hours a day.
Ask a lawyer to practice law for two hours a day.
What are they going to get?
How far can they go?
I feel so grateful for the freedom I have to be a full-time writer that I think, consciously or unconsciously, I feel I have to pay back that
that gift, and the way to pay it back is to give more of myself to a bigger book, a bigger and a bigger book.
Have you got the next novel in mind?
Have you had that epiphanous moment where you've seen something?
Well, I have a story in mind, but I'm not ready to start it.
I'm not ready to start it.
One thing Tim said, which is really interesting.
He's one of the greatest things to O'Brien.
He said, prior to that, John was perceived as
a literary writer.
He said one of the unfortunate spin-offs in Garth is that he began to be perceived as a commercial writer.
People neglected to see many of the wonderful literary things that were in Garth.
I don't know if that's a question, but that's a comment.
Do you generally agree with that kind of an assessment?
Do you think that there are literary things that people tend to miss?
Well, I don't think there are literary things that people may have missed, so much as this.
I mean, I think it is simply true that there are people who are very set in their mind that literary means barely known or not well known at all.
That's what literary means.
If you're a literary writer, it means... It means...
You're not on the New York Times bestseller list.
The books on the bestseller list are slick, trash, commercial fiction.
Unfortunately, that is the case.
That may be the case the majority of the time, but I don't think that...
You know, I'm not unique.
I'm not the only literary author who has bestsellers.
I love Dr. George's new books.
Yes, yeah.
It's amazing to see, and all of a sudden you see, wow, good books on there, you know?
Yeah.
This guy Walter Mosley, have you read him?
Yeah, I think he's very funny.
I think he's got a heck of a future.
Who do you read, by the way?
Do you read contemporary writers?
I certainly read a lot of 19th century writers, but among my contemporaries, I tend to like those big 19th century-like storytellers.
Garcia Marquez, Robertson Davies, Guido Gras.
They are sizably important to me.
I have one or two other questions on how it took all the time.
Does it ever concern you that you might bend a few people out of shape?
I'm going back to Garth now.
I'm convinced.
I was in the U.S.
when I saw the National Book Award that year.
I'm not asking you to comment on this, but I mean you had Mary Lee, Settle, and Alice and Lori.
I know instantly when I saw those two out of three,
that they were going to respond to the Ellen James and that type thing.
And I'm convinced that there was this backlash of people reading things out just the same way somebody might take the CFM out of here and become angry.
And I'm wondering, I'd love to know who the person was that wrote FPW preview, for instance.
what baggage that reader brought to that book.
You're right that there's baggage there.
You're absolutely right.
That's the key to understanding those kind of reviews is that you know that there was a predisposition to that review that had nothing to do with this book.
I don't think so, because it's not the book I read.
No.
And regrettably, I read the thing before I read the book.
Yeah, I know.
And I said, I told my wife, I said, this book is great.
You know, I said, look at the P.W., thank you.
That's really too bad, because that can't... Who reads P.W.
outside of librarians?
In any case, the newspaper people... Yeah, and what librarian is not going to be stuck in a bunch of my books?
They have to.
Well, you see, I think that is a factor to the anger in that review.
Don't forget that it is the case for many writers that the good review
is not only desirable, but necessary, that without the good review, the reader doesn't find you.
The reader doesn't know who you are.
The reader will not find you.
That is the case with so many writers who just aren't well enough known.
They desperately need the good review, well-placed, well-timed, in order to get to the reader.
Now, I don't anymore.
See what I mean?
In other words,
This book, you know, is number nine on the publisher's weekly best-selling list.
It will start next week at number ten on the New York Times list.
It is already number four on the Boston Globe list, number four on the Toronto
Globe and Mail list, number four in the Los Angeles Times.
Wow.
And it's not even published until the second week of September.
See what I mean?
So there are no reviews, and it's there, right?
And the person who read my last novel or any novel of mine and loved it is going to keep going back until I've written a couple in a row
that they really hate.
And that hasn't happened yet.
And you must understand that this, I think, is very crippling to those reviewers who don't like me.
They look upon me as a sort of spreading disease that can't be stopped.
And a review of the particular viciousness of the one in PW is not
It's not unusual for me.
It's not uncommon.
But do you think that part of it is due to some of these factors I suggested earlier?
But you see, I don't think it's even... I would like to think that it was only because of that.
That I had written something in a book that really pissed them off.
Ellen James, you know, pissed people off.
That's true.
cutting out their tongues.
I mean, you know what?
You see, that's with anything.
It hurts because it's so close to the truth.
You do have fanatical people who do insane things.
And there are words that you use even in this book I wrote down.
I mean, you use moronic, idiocy.
I was looking for all the synonyms of stupidity.
I mean, you see it.
You call it by any number of different names, but you call it...
You know, I mean, that is confrontational to some people, perhaps.
No, I agree with you.
But you see, I think that a part of the problem, I would like to think that behind every angry... I would like to think that behind every ugly review I get,
is someone that I have personally made angry.
I would like to think that they'd actually read something of mine that was deeply offensive to them and that just worried the hell out of them and they just had an axe to grind.
And while I think sometimes that's the case, sadly, I think the source of the anger is lazier than the experience of the real reading of a real book.
and the real dislike of scenes or passages in a book.
And when I say lazy, what I mean is I think the reaction is knee-jerk to a very superficial sense of who I am.
People who didn't read the last two books, people who only read too many good reviews of one of my books, or I was on the bestsellers for too many weeks, and they're just
They're ticked off at the attention.
How many of my colleagues, and I write a column, so it's not really a review, and I only write about the ones I like.
I have this luxury where I pick what I want to write about.
But how many critics are going to like Pat Conroy's new book?
I mean, they are offended that the man is so popular and that so many people like him that he has to be this commercial writer, when he's a wonderful writer, he's a great storyteller.
But, you know, you'll see that.
You'll see that happen.
Yeah, I think that.
That they refuse to recognize.
Just tell me one quick thing about the importance of storytelling to you.
I mean, we talked about literary this and literary that and what you're trying to accomplish by that route.
We still have to engage the person to entertain and give them their money for it.
I think entertain is the key because, and when I say entertain, I don't mean only comically.
I do mean comically, but I mean, I think we're also entertained... Well, a lot of Karenians are entertained, but... Yeah, I think we're entertained when we're afraid.
I think we're entertained when we must find out what happens.
You know, the...
Stephen Cain clearly knows how to entertain, and his entertainment takes a very different form than mine, but he's an excellent entertainer.
And what I mean by that is he gets the audience's attention.
And 40 or 50 pages into a book, you are not nearly as engaged and motivated as you will be
400 pages into a book.
That, to me, is the key of storytelling, is that if the story is good, if the storytelling is working, you may be interested on page 40, but you have to be very interested on page 400.
Otherwise, you don't finish the book.
You know, you've got to be there.
And because the point is, you don't have bestsellers that people don't finish.
That's how you have a bestseller.
You've never said in your life to a close friend of yours, you've got to read this book when you're only 20 pages into it.
You only say that to your four best friends who are also readers about a book you finished.
That's when you really feel strongly.
And that's what sells books, not ads in the New York Times Book Review or even front page reviews in the New York Times Book Review.
A front page review in the New York Times Book Review
might put you on the bestseller list for a week.
But the only thing that's going to keep you there, you know, for 10, 12 weeks and counting, is word of mouth.
And there's no word of mouth when people don't finish a book.
I'm convinced that was the case of The Name of the Roads.
I mean, the first printing of that was 10,000.
But they loved it on the front pages of the New York Times.
And it took off after that.
I think the jump start was...
Hey, this looks pretty good.